Okay, I want to do that last because I realized time is at a premium, so we'll get into that
if we have time.
So let's get started then, so I'll try to put on my formal voice and sound like an interviewer
then.
Okay.
You have all the background most hard science fiction writers only dream of, yet your books
are written with obvious emphasis on style and characterization.
Why is this your focus and not the science?
Well, I tend to believe that you should play all your suits if you're going to be an earnest
writer.
You should deal with both style and content, background and characterization and everything.
I certainly include a large dollop of science in my work, I think, and I try to blend this
together with the kind of people who do science.
That's my real interest is this impact of science on people and the other way around.
Do you think that mainstream and science fiction are separate categories or, well, I guess they
are now, but do you think they shouldn't be melded or do you think they should keep this
separate identity?
I think that mainstream and any genre like SF are, in a sense, two ends of a spectrum.
One blends into the other.
There are obviously the books that only science fiction addicts will read, which are incomprehensible
to ordinary readers, and that defines a boundary.
But obviously, it's a gradual transition from one to the other.
Science is in science fiction not the really crucial dividing point.
There are many things in science fiction which set it apart which are not connected with
knowing a great deal of science, but rather with knowing a lot of accepted bits of jargon
or common places we've assumed about the future, the way galactic empires are put together
and so forth, usually very simple minded, like my estimation.
An ordinary reader coming to these things simply cannot understand them, therefore he rather
usually quickly gives up.
But therefore I think that it's the mannerisms of SF that tend to set it apart as much as
anything else.
Of course, science fiction is concerned with content, a great deal more than other literature,
and therefore that scares off people too.
Do you read a great deal of science fiction or mainstream or have a preference for one
or the other?
I read, when I can, the best science fiction and the best in the mainstream, and also,
for example, hard boiled detective stories and a lot of other things.
Now I keep up on the prominent short story writers in America, for example.
So I try to read eclectically.
Excuse me, I'll say it again eclectically.
But of course everyone if they get older has less time to read, particularly if they're
actually engaged in the real world and have some other job other than being a writer.
Do these other works influence your style continually or do you think you've got that
set now?
I don't really think that I've got a style.
I certainly have some identifiable mannerisms.
But it seems to me that every one of my books is written somewhat differently and I do change
style and approach fairly often.
I may be wrong about that.
Many people may think that there is a noticeable Benford style.
But I don't think that I pick up those things from my reading directly, although certainly
I'm influenced by a lot of writers.
Every writer is influenced by people who came before.
Otherwise we'd have to invent literature a whole each time we sat down to do a novel.
Your novel, Timescape, just won the Nebula Award, which congratulations, by the way.
How did you come to write that?
I took ten years to write Timescape.
It's written out of my experience as a graduate student at the University of California in
the 1960s.
Two-thirds of the book occurs in 1962 and 63.
And I had always noticed that science fiction very seldom dealt with the life of a scientist
as it is really lived as I thought.
So when I began to think about writing a book about time, a subject that had already and
always fascinated me, and which science fiction had, it seemed to me, done to death, I began
in fact to think about the way scientists would really try to attempt to transmit information
across time.
Not time travel, but simple time telegrams, if you will.
And how would it happen?
What would make people do it?
How would it be received?
What would scientists think about it?
Because you see the basic ingredient in the novel is to treat time communication like
a new paradigm in science so that you have scientists confronting something that's very
standard way of doing science.
After all, here's an experiment that's being interfered with and seems to be carrying a
message, how bizarre.
And so this is like a scientist encountering a brand new scientific idea.
So you get to see in a dramatic fashion how scientists deal with ambiguity and the unusual
nature of their work, which does crop up now and then.
And after all, that's what scientific revolutions are about.
And at the same time, the reader can understand what's going on.
It's not an arcane matter about genetics or a nuclear physics that's going on.
He knows more than any of the characters, all the way through the book.
And that was what made me think of this as a scheme to show readers things about scientists
that just couldn't be told in the normal way in the world of the, say, the Allah, what's
the double helix and so forth, which is about a specific experiment in the past.
So that was the motivation.
And as you can see, it's sort of a barely science fictional motivation.
I really wanted to talk about both the 60s and 1998 where the message is sent from.
But mostly from the point of view of us right here and right now, 1981, I deliberately made
the dates of the book fixed so that the book was published in hardback in 1980, exactly
halfway between the two times that are the subject of the book.
And that and the context of making comments on political matters and the end of being
able to show a scene from the 1970s that's very different from our 1970s.
All those things made me want to write the book, but then took a mere decade to actually
write it.
You made the novel real to me and to other readers who I've talked to with the little
details, the songs on the radio in the 60s and the current events, 35 cent paperback,
which was hard to believe.
And then how the people were coping with the future.
The thing that really intrigued me was the mercury hunt in the Sewers and England.
This technique of putting in the little realistic scenarios to portray the future in the past
is something that I haven't encountered all that much.
How did you develop that?
Well, that really comes out of thinking very hard for a decade about the matter.
Every once in a while it occurred to me, in the case of the 1998 world, to think about
what ordinary activities they would have that would seem strange to us.
And as the years went on, I would think of these things and jot them down and then I
would try to write a scene about them and to involve a character in them.
I think this method is just living in the world you're writing about for a long time
until it gets to be second nature and you can select from it things you want to show
the readers.
There are whole chapters of timescales which I wrote and reflect on both the present and
the past and finally excluded from the novel feeling that they weren't really necessary.
But there are old facets of the world I worked out and then did use.
Of course, doing the 1960s was straight realistic writing.
I simply did a point for point detailed narrative set in a world that I knew and had lived through
and could remember, I was surprised in enormous detail.
I could remember the newspaper headline, the incidents, who was fighting who for the heavyweight
championship, the whole thing.
And of course, those are just the approaches of the realistic novelist.
So that's what I used and I think the big help was that I did not think of it as being
a science fiction novel that maybe white doesn't feel like a science fiction novel.
In a way, I think it is a science fiction novel.
A lot of real life people inhabited timescales.
Most of them were in the past but some of them were in the future.
I noticed that Davies and Thorne were in the future and even Freeman Dyson had an active
part in the book.
He did some talking and kind of got the hero in trouble.
Do you know most of these people and do you need their permission to put them in a book?
Did they get a kick out of it?
Well, the people who actually have walk on speaking parts who are identified as real
people, I got the permission from.
Freeman Dyson, particularly.
People who were mentioned in passing, I didn't ask for permission because after all, they
are people in the world and you can't refer to them.
No one has a copyright on their name.
But so far no one is ejected to being mentioned or even talked about in the tale in the book.
Dyson certainly did not.
And I don't think any of the disguised characters have said anything about it either.
There are some relatively well-known scientists in the book who are, I would say, rather than
a legal seal, the black concealed nonetheless.
That for me was one of the good things about the book, being able to use my experience
and all the people whom I knew and being able to talk about them the way they are moral
has not always a complementary but that's life, isn't it?
I'd say you knew the twins from Oklahoma quite well from what I gather.
Yes, well, there are some twins from Oklahoma who are not named in there who are in fact
myself and my twin brother.
I had just come from the University of Oklahoma to La Jolla in 1963 and decided what the hell
I would just put myself in the book.
In fact, I appear in the book in several different places.
Have you gotten any feedback from people that normally read mainstream novels about
timescape saying, gee, this is science fiction, it can't be good, but it was or something
like that?
Well, yes, I've gotten a fair number of letters, phone calls and so on from people who, quote,
don't usually read science fiction, unquote, and are surprised to find that they're science
fiction and actually have all the virtues of a regular novel and still be science fiction.
Well, it's good that these people are catching on to that fact.
Admittedly, the field has not given them a large number of examples to learn from, but
I hope we will in the future.
Of course, the reason we haven't produced such books before is because it's stamped hard.
It's a lot of work and science fiction is typically not a field which was a reward taking a decade
to write a book.
That's a sad fact.
It's true.
Did you ever fear during these 10 years that this book might not be a commercial success
because of the subject matter and the emphasis on characterization and so forth?
Definitely.
But I decided to what the hell I was going to write the book the way I wanted to and I
didn't care how it would do.
In fact, when I finished the manuscript, I was pretty convinced that I would be able
to sell it for only a minimal advance and that would be just about it.
The overwhelming success, as far as I'm concerned, of this book.
It's now won four awards.
She said the Nebula has a British award, the Australian, and now the John W. Campbell International
Award.
And to have sold the Well and Hardback and now it's second printing and paperback after
having been out for less than four weeks, that kind of reception is to be astounding,
completely unanticipated.
I personally thought it was by far the best piece of writing I'd ever done, but that doesn't
mean I thought it was going to be commercial.
In fact, I didn't.
Your earlier books had elements of mysticism and transcendental experiences in them, which
were missing from Time's Gate.
Is this a facet of your personality, this enamor with mysticism?
Well, yes.
I tend to put material like that in my books because I think it's there in the sense that
there is a mystical content in science.
So many people have commented on it.
I have a feeling maybe I should let it go for a while.
Of course, it's not really true that the Time's Gate doesn't have elements of mysticism in it.
There is the last long chapter, certainly interpreted in a number of different ways, and there are some very,
very transcendental moments in that last portion of the book.
But certainly the emphasis is much less than in my early work.
You're right about that.
Do you think being so well acquainted with quantum physics puts you in a special position to look at
mystical and transcendental experiences, or would you have it anyway?
Well, that's kind of a chicken and egg question.
One of the reasons I'm interested in quantum mechanics is because it seems to me to be a very fundamental,
transcendental way of viewing the world.
And therefore I tend to use material like that in my books and my wish to look at things from that angle.
So to me it's just another facet of the world that seems to reward being looked at from a transcendental point of view.
I'm mostly, however, a rather realistic novelist.
I'm not really, I don't think of myself as being a mystical writer.
Maybe others do.
I think it's true.
Larry Niven has said that any time travel story is perforce a fantasy, since the known laws of physics prohibit it.
As a physicist, do you foresee any loopholes that might allow time travel or time communication or faster than light travel,
which this would all tie together?
Well, yes.
Of course, the timescale at its basis says, suppose there is this particle called a tachyon, which travels faster than light.
The tachyon has been talked about in scientific literature for about 20 years, and hundreds of papers have been written about it.
I've written one myself.
So if the tachyon exists, it certainly implies faster than light, and therefore reverse time communication.
That's the whole point about timescales.
It's about, it's set in a world in which you say, suppose this is true.
As far as time travel goes, I don't have the slightest clue how to do it.
Maybe it turns out I'd end a tachyon and shoot it backward in time.
It's hard to see how you could do it.
That's all.
We can't transport someone spatially now, just with waves.
You can't teleport.
So I think in the sense that Niven meant it, yes, time travel is a fantasy in the strict sense that science doesn't tell us how to do it.
But the seduction of time travel stories is the great feeling of perspective they give you, and being able to contrast past, present, and future so easily.
So I think that those stories are going to go on for a very long time.
Everyone loves them, and I do too.
They have produced, that area has produced some of the best SSF ever written.
So I really think it makes sense to continue the convention in the face of quite well-founded scientific ejection.
You rewrote deeper than the darkness as the stars enshroud, and I understand that you perhaps may go back and reduce some other old works.
Why do you choose to rewrite the old books rather than put all your energy into something new?
Basically because I didn't want the old works to appear with my name on them when I could see that they were so deeply flawed, and I thought I could do a better job.
I don't think I'm going to do that with any more of my books, but I certainly greatly revised a novel of mine, a sort of a homage to the Heinlein Juvenile called the Jupiter Project.
I revised that when it went into paperback, and I did that as you said with the stars enshroud.
But basically I don't like to have less than my best in front of the public, and I care more about craftsmanship than I do about storing up my energies for the next project.
I would prefer to salvage an old work than hammer away at a new one if I could be contented that at least I had never done anything I thought was really dreadful and allowed it to go out in public.
A lot of writers don't feel this way, and I understand particularly economically why they would believe so, but I don't have to write so much.
Writing is a hobby for me, so I could do it as I like. Thank God.
How do you juggle writing of the obvious caliber that you practice it with the pretty full-time role of being a physics professor?
Well, I spend most of my time doing research and a lot of time teaching of course, and then I have maybe 10, 15% of my time left over for writing.
It's not really left over because it's my weekends and evenings. How do I do it? Sometimes I wonder. The best answer is hurriedly.
But in fact, I do work on my prose a great deal. I do many drafts and everything.
I recently acquired a word processor to make this process simpler.
But fundamentally, long ago I decided to practice time conservation wherever possible.
The first rule of that is never do anything twice unless you enjoy it.
So I try to never say, have to redraft simple things like NIMOs and always very selective about what I do with time.
Other than that, I just have to say I draw a lot of my material that I write about from life, from observing people and so on.
So I'm really doing two things at once. When I go to a scientific conference, I'm sopping up the material,
but I'm also sopping up scientists watching the way people actually act.
Every novelist does that. It's just that most novelists are full-time writers, and therefore they don't get out and see the real world very much.
I think that's the great liability of being a professional writer who only does that, is that you run out of material.
And I think the 20th century is full of writers whose big problem is that they ran out of material.
Let me go back now and ask you the first question on the list since it looks like we have time.
Give us a bit of background how you got into writing science fiction.
Well, I was in graduate school in La Jolla in 1964.
I was working very hard, and I really needed a break.
But just going to the beach didn't seem to do it.
So I began to write short stories. It was a pleasant thing you could do for an hour in the evening before you fell asleep.
And I worked away at that, wrote some detective stories, which I never sold, then wrote some science fiction short stories, two or three, I think.
The third one, I think, was the one I sold, the first one I sold.
And I entered it, and specifically wrote it for a short story contest in the magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction.
And it was one second place. And what did that make? Something like $100.
And I got a lifetime subscription to the magazine, which has turned out to be worth quite a bit.
So back there in 1965, I started out my career that way.
I kept writing short stories as I did my doctorate and went off and became a postdoctoral fellow.
And then began to think in terms of writing a novel.
And it took me, I would say, really the better part of a decade to learn to write novels with anything approaching skill.
It's a long haul. I've been writing now for what, 16 years? Or 17 years? Maybe more?
And I wrote, in fact, when I was in high school. I wrote a few short stories and then gave it up.
So I just had writing as a hobby all the way through my life.
When you first joined the physics departments, how did your colleagues take it before you have tenure, when you're just green behind the ears, that sort of thing, knowing that you're a writer?
Do they even know it or dig you about it or just don't care what?
All of the above. Some of them just ignore it. Some of them think it's outright evidence that you're not doing it.
You're really earnestly spending all of your time and 24 hours a day on your profession, which they more or less expect you to do.
And a number of them think it's a good idea that you should have more than one suit in your hand.
So it runs through the whole gamut of opinions.
There are a lot of academics who think that writing is okay.
And if I were writing little short stories for literary quarterlies, it would be perfectly okay and just fine.
But if I actually write commercially, that's not so good.
And to write commercially and be successful, that's even worse.
And to write science fiction and be commercially successful is really pretty low.
So there are a fair number of those people, but I just ignore them.
They cannot be converted or can be educated, but they just be forgotten.
Well, we noticed that you're now a full professor, so you really don't have to worry about that anymore.
Well, that's true. I've never really worried about it anyway.
I really don't give that much of a damn if people think about my writing in terms of if they evaluated on the basis of some kind of precedece status they wish to assign to.
I think being an approved writer in this society is more of a sure sign that you're a secondary.
That is the end of the list.
And we sure appreciate it.
I'm supposed to ask you one other question.
Have you read James Hogan's Thrice Upon a Time?
It's come out this year and we have a raging battle going on in our group about it.
So we were going to ask you that.
What's the battle about?
Hogan writes, he's kind of an interminable lecturer in contrast.
Now, this is me as opposed to writing characterizations.
And so the battle is how do you really, how does one write and make it more fun?
And I prefer the characterizations or the people prefer the golly gee science aspect of it.
And he has a lot of that.
That's what his is mainly that approach.
He's invented a whole new realm of physics and in order to get the message.
He uses a pretty clever little device where he hops from day to day through a computer back to the present to back to the past to tell them to alter it.
And it gets altered and then other things happen.
And it's quite enjoyable, but it's just an interesting comparison and contrast to your book.
And so we just had to ask it.
We wanted to ask it at the end.
Yes, well, I really should read the book.
I know exactly what kind of thing Hogan does.
I elected, consciously elected a long time ago not to do that because I just don't think for me it's worth doing.
It's very clever, but it's a mile wide and a millimeter deep.
I'm not saying this specifically about his book because I haven't read it.
It's just that that kind of writing is for me self-limiting.
You will only reach a certain kind of audience with it.
And it's not a bad audience.
It's good audience, but it's very narrow.
And also I find it boring to write that way.
Just plain boring.
I hate to give lectures.
I can give lectures in person.
Why should I give lectures in novels?
What can we look for from you in the near future, in the far future?
Well, I am finishing this week at the end of July.
A novel I have provisionally titled Against Infinity, which is a very different kind of book with me.
And I hope that will be out next year.
After that I have the next volume in trilogy I'm writing, a very loosely connected trilogy.
The first volume of it was A Novel Called in the Ocean of Night, which I think is the second best book I've written after Times Square.
And the sequel to that is called Across the Sea of Suns.
I have a good draft of that done, and I hope that the next half year or so to finish off the draft of that.
And then to get on to the book that goes beyond that.
And then after that I have a book which is some way similar to Times Square.
And it's a general approach to things, but it's not about time in mind.
And I hope to write that, but I know that that will take a number of years.
So that's all I can plan on.
Any other questions guys?
Actually, it has been pretty popular for an effort to participate in.
Oh, any inquiries about movies on Times Square?
Yes, there have been a number.
Hollywood has been in terrible shape this last year, and there was a cost out done on Times Square which said it would cost more than $20 million, I think $22 million in price to shoot.
And of course they were not able to get up that amount of money, but it's still out.
I think CBS is looking at it right now.
Who knows? It would be possible to shoot it.
But Lord knows about Hollywood as always.
Anything else guys?
Okay, we certainly appreciate it.
And as a fan, thanks very much for slipping in tomorrow into a book. I didn't ever think it would be possible.
Great, sure. Anything else you want to slip in? I'm not sure.
Well, I've talked to these guys. I think I'm a chemist and I think chemistry is definitely the worst treated of all the physical sciences in science fiction.
I think people don't do a very good job of that.
The physics and astronomy and the biology, great. The soft science is great. Chemistry kind of gets screwed, I think.
I think so. There are not many chemistry stars.
That's right. But actually it is kind of a boring subject to most people.
How clean is chemistry?
Yeah, this is true with the atmospheres and so forth.
Sure. The nitrogen fix? Yeah, sure. Okay, how could I forget?
Okay, we appreciate your taking the time to talk to us.
And again, we'll get back to you and perhaps do another one. One of these days when your other books come out, we look forward to them.
Fine, I appreciate the opportunity. It's really nice to be able to speak specifically to an SF audience.
Seldom gets the chance.
Okay, thanks again. We'll talk to you later then.
Thank you. Bye-bye then.